### NEP_Copepods_ThermalPatterns
## Code for the manuscript: 
# "Temperature and patterns of occurrence and abundance of key copepod in the NorthEast Pacific"
### by: <b>Lauren W. Ashlock</b>, Marisol García-Reyes, Chelle Gentemann, Sonia Batten, William J. Sydeman

***

## Abstract
The Northeast Pacific is a highly heterogeneous and productive ecosystem, yet it is vulnerable to climate change and extreme events such as marine heat waves. Recent heat wave induced die-offs of fish, marine mammals, and seabirds in the Gulf of Alaska were associated with the loss of large, lipid-rich copepods, which are a vital food resource for forage fishes. The critical and temperature sensitive role of copepods in this ecosystem motivates our investigation into the impacts of temperature on copepod occurrence, abundance, and phenology. Here, we pair long term _in situ_ copepod data from Continuous Plankton Recorder surveys with satellite temperature data to determine the influence of water temperature on three key copepod taxa: _Neocalanus plumchrus_, _Calanus pacificus_, and _Oithona spp_. Through the use of linear models and thermal threshold methods, we demonstrate that _N. plumchrus_ is most vulnerable to warming and future marine heat waves in this region. Linear models demonstrate that _N. plumchrus_ abundance is negatively related to temperature, and thermal threshold methods reveal that _N. plumchrus_ has an upper thermal threshold of 11.5◦C for occurrence, and 10.5◦C for abundance. Additionally, examining N. plumchrus abundance before and during the 2014–2016 marine heat wave demonstrates reduced species abundance during past warming events. _Oithona spp._ and _C. pacificus_ appear to be less vulnerable to warm temperatures. However, their presence will not be sufficient to supplement the loss of the larger-bodied and lipid-rich _N. plumchrus_. Our findings demonstrate the power of using long-term _in situ_ data to determine thermal tolerances, and suggest the need to further examine the potential resilience of _N. plumchrus_ to climate change.
